okay so it says that I'm live um and uh
happy to be here today uh it is Thursday
July
25th
2024 and uh just waiting
for folks to
uh to
come uh my name is Dr Mark Eaton uh I am
a licensed
psychologist and um I operate the heel
NPD YouTube channel as well as the heel
and PD
podcast all
right
yeah and uh okay yeah looks like some
folks are here um hi everyone welcome I
was just introducing myself uh my name
is Dr Mark Eaton uh licensed
psychologist in the states of California
and New York uh and uh I recently also
got a teleah Health registration in the
State of Florida so I can work there now
as well uh and I specialize in treating
writing thinking about uh and uh
publishing material about uh
pathological narcissism and NPD and also
related issues and disorders and I'm
here today to answer questions and also
talk uh all things NPD uh hello my halo
Within
welcome and uh hi christe welcome glad
to see
you and uh oh looks like uh cluster B
milkshake is here
hi all right yeah lots of folks welcome
glad to see everyone um yeah so I'm I'm
here to answer your questions so please
uh post any questions or comments or
discussion topics uh you'd like to hear
more about or learn more about
hi
ziv someone says uh hi doc great
content I don't uh I don't know the
ceric alphabet but uh hi thank you for
uh letting me know you find the content
helpful okay Artis Al line asks uh could
I speak a little bit about getting in
touch with uh your inner
child yeah um so uh gosh that's a great
question um I think uh that's a gradual
process it takes time um but you know
probably uh one of the best ways that
I've um found to go about doing that is
uh just to try to try to think about you
know try to locate I guess the the the
younger parts of you the the younger
perspectives that you might have um in
uh in in the issues that come up uh in
your relationships so in your
relationships with other people and then
also uh in your relationship with
yourself I think that a lot of times um
people have a tendency to overlook uh
the fact that you know we we have a
relationship with ourselves uh and we
tend uh to uh enact old relationship
patterns things that we've sort of taken
in uh from our early experiences lessons
that we've sort of derived from those
experiences we tend to enact those
patterns uh in our relationships with
other people and also our relationships
with ourselves uh I once read like a
kind of a a really helpful sort of
little quote about that uh and it went
something along the lines of you know uh
in all relationships we do one one or a
combination of the following three
things we treat um other people the way
that we were treated uh we find someone
who will treat us the way that we were
treated or we treat ourselves the way
that we were treated and I I find that
to be true in my work also just as a
human being on planet Earth um I find
that to be true within myself as well um
I think approaching uh your the your
thoughts and your feelings particularly
about yourself um gently is important um
try not to try not to Bear Down uh or
put a lot of pressure on yourself to be
any anything in particular to feel
anything in particular or not feel
something that you don't want to feel um
and and try to treat yourself the way
that you might treat uh a little kiddo
you know so you know ideally we don't
pressure kids
to you know look a certain way you know
feel a certain way want something in
particular you know ideally we sort of
allow those things to emerge
spontaneously and
authentically um as as the child you
know sort of discovers the world and
discovers themselves um and I think a
lot of us kind of maybe didn't didn't
have that to varying degrees uh when we
were young and uh and now is the time to
um to try to give that to yourself to
try to um develop that sort of
relationship with yourself and and when
you do that when you allow yourself to
to like the things that you like not
like the things you don't like feel the
way that you feel um need the things
that you need I think you are kind of by
default uh getting in touch with your
inner child in that way in a in a
productive way um so I I apologize if
that's a little bit of a garbled answer
um I find myself feeling unusually
anxious today uh about doing this live
stream I'm not sure why exactly um I
think you know what I think it is uh
partly because when I signed on uh
there's a little counter up here that
says who's here and it said nobody was
here and I suddenly I felt like uh uh oh
like what if nobody comes and what if
I'm just stuck here talking to my you
know monitor uh for the next hour or
whatever uh so anyway I had like a
little bit of a crisis I tried to
contain it um I'm so glad I'm so glad
people came I'm so relieved about that
so thank you for coming and uh I I'll
try to I'll try to you know uh Center
myself a little bit uh here and uh
provide more more coherent
answers
um
okay Neil asks can I talk about any
overlap of NPD and autism you know gosh
I get this question a lot and I want to
preface it by saying that I am not a
specialist uh in the treatment or
assessment or you know anything having
to do with uh ASD autistic uh autism
spectrum disorders um I I have worked uh
with a few patients who um you know had
diagnosed ASD and I understand that
that's becoming more and more common I
think as as you know uh clinicians and
and uh sort of our our society at large
learn learns more about ASD and the
varying ways that it can present and and
uh and so on and so forth um you
know I I would be hardpressed I think to
say
anything uh useful about this except
that
um so yeah I would be hardpressed to say
anything useful about this actually I
think I think I'm going to pass on this
question Neil and and I think that's a
uh an invitation to me to um you know
hit the books and learn a little bit
more about the ways that these two
issues might uh might overlap I I I
don't want to I don't want to say
something and give an answer just to
give an answer and have it be um
incorrect information or have it be you
know off base uh in some way um but I
thank you for the question and uh and I
I will look into that it might actually
be a topic for a future video
okay okay hi Dr eonon can you give
advice for me who's in love with a
pathologically narcissist girlfriend she
has the diagnosis but I really want to
make it work with her uh and love your
content well thank you glad you love the
content
um gosh uh that's a that's a that's a
difficult question as well um so
somebody who has a diagnosed personality
disorder you know that means that you
know that uh there's enough sort of
internal
instability um and uh and you know the
the deficits perhaps in in coping uh and
in
mentalizing um and in communicating are
are significant and severe enough that
you know it has warranted an NPD
diagnosis um so that's going to be a
challenge right it's going to be a
challenge
uh in particular I think uh for you uh
to feel seen to feel like you you sort
of show up and and register in in the
relationship um
particularly uh when the stakes feel
high right um and uh and that's because
when we're talking about personality
disorders you know there there's a
tendency to um become more defensive for
uh um the person to becoming more
preoccupied with um with their own you
know sort of um questions of um and
issues pertaining to um you know
internal uh cohesion and um and you know
and stuff like that right personality
disorders tend to become aggravated in
the context of interpersonal conflict um
and also in the context of um emotional
uh like closeness and intimacy um and so
you know unfortunately those are the
very areas right where you
know like especially in romantic
relationships um that that's you know
we're looking for increased enhanced
emotional intimacy we're looking for
vulnerability uh we we are you know we
want the person to uh be able to you
know depend on us and to you know
Express their um you know um their need
uh for us um and and folks with NPD you
know depending on the configuration that
that can be a real Challenge and so I
think there's a tendency for people in
relationship to people with NPD so the
non- NPD partner to feel invisible to
feel like they um they're they're just
not getting seen right um and this is
this is um actually a an enactment in a
sense uh of of the uh early care
environment for the person who had NPD
right you know the thing that kind of
causes NPD uh well one thing that can
cause NPD uh is not feeling like you
show up you know for the for um to your
caregivers like they like they can see
you like they uh can decode you know how
you feel and what you want and that and
that all of that is okay so there's this
tendency to you know build up this kind
of shell or or this kind of wall we call
it the false self uh and to and to kind
of go inward um and
um and and in doing
that uh people around you then when you
grow up uh can feel like they're not
getting seen and they're not um you know
showing up so I think that that's going
to be probably the biggest challenge um
just kind of across the board uh when I
when I talk and consult with uh family
members and loved ones of people with
NPD um that's often the the thing that I
hear most um and uh and I feel like you
know non-defensive communication is
really key there um you know just
finding a time uh that the the phrase I
heard recently that I really liked and
I've heard it before but it just kind of
brought it back to mind was a strike
when the iron's cold uh so you know wait
for things to settle down to calm down
and then find a time when things aren't
escalated to um to talk about you know
your experience right um if if you're
not feeling uh like like she has space
for you then then letting her know that
and and kind of being curious about what
is her experience when there's conflict
or you know when when these when
whatever the problematic Dynamic that
you're noticing shows up uh ask her you
know in a spirit of open curiosity right
like what's what's going on for you when
this happens and and listen um and I
find that you know giving the person the
feeling of being heard and listened to
helps them to relax those defenses
enough you kind of put their Dukes down
a little bit um that that they they can
then be more receptive to your
experience
um so that's kind of a generic answer
you know obviously if there's if there's
something not okay happening which you
know is sometimes the case in um in you
know relationships with people who have
any personality disorder um you know
because personality disorders involve
emotional disregulation uh and they
involve boundary confusion uh and
impulse control issues um and there's a
tendency to skew or distort perceptions
especially of close interpersonal
relationships if stuff like that has
happened and it's hurting you or you're
you're feeling you know mistreated and
like right um then then that's a
different that's a different situation
uh you need to prioritize taking care of
yourself making sure that you're safe
making sure that um you know you're
getting what you need um and then as
long as that is happening you know then
um see what I said what I just said you
know a couple minutes before um and uh
and best of luck to both you and uh and
your girlfriend I wish you both
well okay Noel asks
uh all right starting to calm down um I
can feel my heart rate like slowing down
a little bit and I'm able to think again
um Noel Noel asks what's the true
definition of narcissist and
narcissistic is the dictionary
wrong uh like the DSM five or is it
right yes um yes it's wrong and yes it's
right um the problem with the dsm5
definition uh is that it's only part of
the story right it it
emphasizes uh
grandiosity and um at the expense of the
other side of the equation which is
vulnerability right so a true definition
of pathological narcissism or and of
pathological narcissism would be um you
know uh issues pertaining to the
inflation or deflation of self-esteem
right okay so disregulated self-esteem
the person's uh self-image is not
realistic and it's not stable okay so
and that can swing both ways okay so
sometimes that swings in the direction
of grandiosity and arrogance and you
know megalomania or whatever and
sometimes it swings in the direction of
a
deflated um self-image okay so you know
self-loathing self hyper criticality
toward the self um and things like that
depressive experiences okay which is why
uh NPD is sometimes mistaken clinically
for bipolar disorders because the you
know you've got these wide swings in
self-image sometimes uh and clinicians
who don't really know very much about
NPD will mistake that for bipolar
disorder and sometimes there's an
overlap as well um
okay so in order to protect against the
deflation of self-esteem okay so
self-esteem loss of self-esteem uh
there's a tendency to inflate
self-esteem and it's not conscious it's
it's just kind of the Dynamics of the
personality okay there's an instability
there uh and so you know because losing
your self-regard and seeing yourself as
worthless uh is so awful there's a
tendency to you really push uh you know
for um positive um uh self-object
experiences positive infusions of
self-esteem okay feeling admired feeling
idealized feeling complimented um
feeling important or privileged um or
exclusive somehow all right so the dsm5
focuses in on the latter part of that
okay they focus in on um what it looks
like when someone with NPD is in what we
call a compensated or grandiose State uh
what they don't talk so much about is
why somebody would be like that why
somebody would be arrogant grandiose why
they would lack empathy why they would
you know uh be engage in exploit
exploitative Behavior Uh with other
people and the reason is because there's
a deficit
underlying uh that that grandio
presentation that compensated defensive
essentially presentation um and uh and
my hope and the hope of a number of
other clinicians and researchers is that
future additions of the DSM will kind of
restore the balance okay because they're
used to be a balance here uh prior to
the mid1 1980s the DSM
uh was more even-handed in terms of
discussing the internal conflicts and
deficits involved in NPD as well as the
way that the person compensates for
those um and then and then it it kind of
went off-kilter uh and it's been that
way for the last 40 years or so and um
35 No 40 yeah 40 years um and and we're
hoping that it they they write the
course with the next Edition they're
starting to little by little um the the
dsm5 text revision that was just
published a few years ago uh it not in
the diagnostic checklist okay that's
still that's been the same for ages
but in the part where it kind of um
describes in narrative form the things
that you'll you might see uh in NPD it's
starting to mention important factors
like uh suicidality so people with NPD
are at risk for suicide um things like
um you know the tendency to
self-medicate with substance abuse uh
the tendency to have like a a
perfectionistic inflexibly
perfectionistic um issues and and the
ways that that that that feeling that
way can cause a collapse into depression
uh in the face of um perceived failure
and and rejection and stuff like that
okay just making sure my mic is still on
all right uh thanks for the question no
and um let's
see XX asks how can individuals with NPD
get more in touch with their authentic
selves that's a good question um pay
attention to how you feel um For Better
or Worse right not not in like a
pressured way not in a I need to feel
this way so I'm G to kind of work myself
into a head space where that's how I
feel because that's I I see that happen
a lot um and and uh not in in
um a way that is hypercritical or overly
judgmental of your uh negative feelings
your your feelings of
inadequacy to the extent that they might
be there or shame or or you know stuff
like that right anxiety because there's
a tendency right for the person to kind
of sit in sternn Judgment of themselves
okay to not treat themselves like a
subject all right like a person but to
treat themselves like an object who's
either doing well or not doing well um
right it's shiny or it's or it's dull uh
it's impressive or it's worthless um
that's not what I'm talking about it's
not it's not actively engaging in in
that assessment of self and and your
self performance in a sense but rather
make trying to make the space as best
you can and when you when you think of
it uh for to just feel however you feel
okay if if you feel like you're not good
enough allow yourself to to kind of be
with that feeling a little bit without
indulging it either right just just kind
of being aware that it's there trying
not to judge that it's there just
allowing it to be um the same thing if
you're feeling great right great enjoy
it allow it to be there without trying
to force it without trying to hold on to
it and cling to it um without needing
for it for only that to be you know the
whole whole truth right um in other
words not trying to exclude the fact
that sometimes you don't feel great um
just allowing it to to just to just be
whatever it is okay maybe it's
complicated maybe it's messy maybe it's
not what you want uh maybe it is what
you want
whatever you know the way that we sort
of encourage authenticity in young
children right is to greet whatever they
bring to us um
with just just a spirit of curiosity and
openness right if they're crying you
know it's not like you know you know
up right wipe those tears off your
face you you know it's not that right
it's it's um it's oh my gosh like are
are you sad oh my gosh what happened you
know and then and and and and trying to
uh welcome that emotional experience
without needing for it to be something
other than what it
is uh and that's that's you know
when little kids are met that way right
um consistently enough then they kind of
uh have an openness to whatever it is
that's coming up inside that that that
line of communication is open and they
can listen to that you know authentic
Wellspring of Joy or sorrow whatever it
is that that's inside of them and use
that to help guide them through life and
relationships to orient them right um
toward toward what is true for them um
and and when kids are kind of cut off
from that somehow when they're very
young not only is it a tragedy but but
they end up very confused sometimes
about what they want how they feel who
they are uh as adults you know they end
up in relationships and they're not sure
if they want to be there right it
because they don't really know how they
feel they know how they're kind of
supposed to feel they know how the other
person wants them to feel and so they
try to give that person that uh but that
but it
inevitably you know doesn't turn out so
well right and and then you know if you
go on like other YouTube channels or my
YouTube channel and you read the
comments you see a lot of comments where
these heartbroken people are like you
know the the narciss IST never loved me
right and and they what the lesson they
derive from that is oh well that person
was lying to me the whole time and maybe
maybe that's true but maybe it's that
the person not only didn't know how they
really felt but they were trying
desperately to sort of act in alignment
with how they thought they were supposed
to feel right
um and uh and and that's that's really
sad when that happens um and uh and so
just trying to make space inside of
yourself for what's true for you whether
it's good whether it's bad whether it's
shiny whether it's dull whether it's
pretty whether it's ugly whatever it is
and however whatever judgments you have
about it recognize that those judgments
well well they're they're kind of a part
of this system of of of trying to um
make yourself good enough to Warrant
love uh and and and the fact of the
matter is you don't have to be good
enough to be loved that's not what love
is um and if that's what you learned
love was when you were little uh then
I'm you
know I think that's that's really sad
and I think it's okay to be sad about
that um and to be gentle with the part
of yourself that was hurt that way if
that's what happened um so but I hope
that answers your question and uh thank
you okay Rita asks why doesn't why does
a
narc I understand this this is the the
common abbreviation but it's just a
little bit
dehumanizing uh disappear all of a
sudden without any apparent
reason
um well a little bit of what I was just
saying uh that there there there can
be confusion inside about what the
person actually wants and how they
actually feel and there's this you know
so when we talk about like a false self
uh you might have heard that term in
some of the videos that I've made and
stuff um the false self is the child's
best effort to be the person they think
they have to be in order to be worth
anything okay and it comes from having
experienced some kind of conditional
love right you know ideally we're loved
unconditionally okay whoever we happen
to be right you know however Nature Made
Us you know and and I think we're all
sort of entitled to having some part of
our life where we're just loved just for
being who and what we are uh where
there's no pressure to be anything in
particular in order to earn that love
right um and and when people don't get
that um then they they try to force
themselves into this shape that they
think will make them worthy of love and
in so doing they cut themselves off or
they become cut off because it's not
conscious from what's true for them on
an emotional level and and not only that
but so much water goes under the bridge
over time and across relationships or
across the same relationship that they
end up four five years in and or you
know whatever and and now they're like
oh my gosh how do I even feel about this
person I I don't know you know uh but
now it's like well you they feel like
they couldn't possibly be honest about
that because they feel like they've done
something wrong now um and I I hear
about this a lot in in the work that I
do with patients uh this dilemma that
comes up that's one of the dilemas
another dilemma is uh called a
dependency dilemma and that's uh the
issue is that
um being vulnerable uh in the context of
close
relationships um exposes it exposes the
person to their
underlying dependency okay and we all
have dependency right we all dependency
longings we all need people we need to
be loved we need to be whatever it is
right held um seen okay but there's
there's this way that people with
NPD uh have learned that okay the answer
is to be perfectly self-sufficient all
right or at least to experience
themselves as perfectly
self-sufficient um and and that has to
do with uh if if you read kernberg it
has to do with intolerable frustrations
when they were babies essentially right
they have these needs to to be loved a
certain way and they weren't and it's so
frustrating and that frustration is so
toxic and so pervasive in their little
self structure that they just they have
to figure out some way to shortcircuit
the relational experiences that are
causing the frustration and so the way
they do that is to try to merge with
their own uh IDE ego ideal okay so that
and the fantasy there the unconscious
fantasy is that they'll never need
anything again if they're able to be
perfect they won't have to feel
frustrated anymore if they're perfect um
and the problem is that that kind of a
split it's because that's a split right
okay I'm going to cut myself off from
all the things all the parts of me that
need something and I'm gonna fantasize
that I'm instead need less so that's a
split inside the the uh
personality it it means that all of the
dependency stuff gets like concentrated
it becomes this super
concentrated mass of infantile
dependency longings right like
not just needing somebody but like
needing people in the way that like
two-year-olds need people you know um
and and when things get split off like
that then they they don't get worked on
they don't get Incorporated and in into
the adult personality and they don't get
uh sort of modified into this kind of
more moderate realistic integrated form
over time they just stay kind of cut off
and concent
and and now it becomes a real problem
right because the the adult is like you
know I don't know how to be right in in
close relationships because I feel on
some level inside of me a bottomless
dependency that if I ever let out I'm
absolutely sure would drive everyone
away and so I have to kind of keep it
split off and keep it hidden and I have
to keep trying to compensate for the
fact that it's there I have to keep
pretending that I don't need anything
and showing you what I think you want to
see in order to be worth something and
and therefore loved by you um so over
time that becomes so exhausting that
eventually the person just throws up
their hands and they're like I I can't I
can't do this anymore right they reach
some critical mass and they're like I
can't do it anymore and then they just
leave sometimes um that's the second
issue that comes up and the third issue
that comes up has to do with um
splitting and a in a specific instance
of splitting a special case of splitting
that happens in NPD more often than
other personality disorders and that's
called idealizing and devaluing
so you know like I said before in
personality disorders the boundaries are
really porous like they're not well
defined um and that has to do with the
fact that the self is just not
well developed and well integrated okay
so you know it's what is self and what
isn't well I depends on the situation
right um and so because of that there
can be a lot of
confusion now the the self needs to
perceive itself as perfect right and
self-sufficient how do we get that need
met well by being P by being uh
idealized by other perfect people right
okay uh uh so and and and by being um in
um like associated with perfect people
okay
so that's what people with NPD have a
tendency to do they'll they'll find
somebody who they genu to whom they're
genuinely attracted or you know they
genuinely
admire and that person will be perceived
by them to be
Flawless and they'll think I've finally
found the you know the one right and
when they're with that sort of idealized
person they themselves feel ideal okay
they feel in alignment with that ego
ideal that I was talking about
before now over time because nobody's
perfect disappointments will start to
accumulate in the in the context of the
relationship and they'll start to you
know that that idealized image of the
other person will start to like show
cracks you
know and and because of the poorest
boundaries they will experience those
imperfections okay as
betrayals and as contempt right um and
and
eventually it'll get to be to the point
where again a kind of critical mass is
reached and the idealization flips into
a devaluation okay they move from the
idealized side of the split to the
devalued side of the
split and suddenly that idealized person
is perceived to be absolutely just the
worst person ever uh not only that but
in their perception it's always been
that way and maybe they just didn't see
it you know so the present is Rewritten
but also all of history is Rewritten and
this is kind of the the thing with
splitting right it's not just black and
white thinking it's the person shifts
from an idealizing and idealized self
State into a devaluing and devalued
self- State and when they do that all of
reality changes around them okay and the
context of the relationship changes with
that and so now suddenly they feel like
leaving you is what they should have
done immedi like they they shouldn't
have spent any time with you at all
right um they might even feel like
they're um they're sticking up for
themselves in some way they're writing a
wrong they're correcting an injustice by
leaving you uh and
and when when they're viewing it through
that
lens it's it's not it's it's not that
they're cutting and and running and
leaving you holding a big bag of
right it's that you've been um deceiving
them them or hurting them or something
right the whole time and now they're
finally taking their life back and
that's how it can feel
um and and you as a person maybe who's
not splitting is like what in the hell
just happened and a reasonable person
would deduce from that experience that
that that the narcissist is
um uh you know conniving and
uh calculating and deceiving and
manipulative and um you know like
they're real evil person right but that
assumes that there's a there's a
consistency in their worldview okay and
that they were sort of planning this the
whole time and that's not the case
necessarily remember there are splits in
the self and what's on what's in the
devalued place okay the the V vulnerable
place so to
speak the grandiose idealizing part of
the self doesn't have access to that and
vice versa all right these splits are
maintained by dissociative phenomena
they're not you know it's like being on
one Island and you know trying to get to
another Island like you can't get there
from here okay it it it's only when uh
the sort of what whatever um conditions
are met and then there's a sudden shift
suddenly you're not on the first island
suddenly you're on the other Island and
everything looks different from that
Island okay so I hope that explains it
uh that was a long winded answer but I I
hope that's helpful and thanks for the
question okay uh doc please tell me how
to understand that I am already at a
neurotic level of
narcissism so are you saying that you
think you're at a neurotic level of
narcissism and you want me to tell you
how to know for sure um
well uh okay so now
remember and for anybody who doesn't is
not a uh familiar with this terminology
this is there's a developmental Spectrum
all right uh in terms of the severity of
a personality issue um and the the the
higher up the developmental Spectrum you
go the less severe the personality issue
is um personality disorders occur at the
bottom half of that developmental
Spectrum um and then when you get above
that bottom half it's no longer a
personality disorder now it's more like
a personality style okay um the the core
conflicts and issues are the same but
but the M the personality has matured
and developed around those core issues
and conflicts so that they're not so
disruptive anymore um and uh and and the
person is kind of able to not only see
themsel as a whole object a whole person
uh but also to see and relate to other
people as whole people not split parts
of people like I was just
describing
so that being said uh it's important to
recognize that we all move around on
this spectrum okay um but typically
um only to the
adjacent um sort of strata all right so
the bottom is is the psychotic level and
I just made a video about that so check
that out on my channel if you want
um another word for that level would be
like a kind like like a very
developmentally early
immature way of being in the world okay
so developmentally immature that even
reality isn't consistent okay like like
for very little kids you know um they
they change reality all the time they
reality is fluid to them they don't have
the same kind of stable relationship
with reality that most adults do where
it's like uh I want that to be true but
it's not true right now ask a
three-year-old and they're like yeah
that's true why why because I imagined
it you know I mean and they mean it
right you know thoughts and actions are
equivalent to two-year olds and
three-year olds okay and and ideally we
all kind of grow out of that but if
there's too much trauma if there's too
much instability if like life is
throwing too much at you and you
it's overwhelm in like your little mind
uh you might not you might be so kind of
buckled down uh that that you you don't
have the ability to um kind of mature
out of that mode of of um perceiving and
and
experiencing after
reality uh you reach What's called the
the sort of borderline level okay and
the in the borderline level the the
relationship to reality is more stable
although it's not perfectly stable um
and now the issue is more centered
around individuation okay so separating
psychologically from other people
remember earlier I was talking about how
in personality disorders there's poorest
boundaries well that's that's why okay
it's not as we kind of consolidate a
sense of self in a
self-image we're we're kind of learning
okay this is me and that's you all right
um
but trauma and overwhelming stress and
adverse childhood experiences and stuff
like that that can really interrupt uh
the development of those boundaries and
uh especially if there's like abuse
happening like physical abuse sexual
abuse emotional abuse like stuff where
somebody is like intrusively crossing
your boundaries on a regular basis how
on Earth are you supposed to develop any
kind of stable consistent sense of what
you and what's not you you know
so that's the borderline
level uh and then the next level that
you mature into is the neurotic level
and this is what this uh viewer is is
asking about what happens is you get
this sense of okay this is me and this
is not me and it's fairly stable and
that the self-image becomes fairly
stable as well and and typically more
integrated okay okay so there's not a
lot of split-off parts there's not a lot
of internal you know siloing of parts of
the self but instead it's kind of all
sort of fluid
um and when that happens um there's
there's kind of like this quickening
almost there's like there's the
appearance of abilities that weren't
previously there okay and one of them is
the ability to
grieve uh and and the reason being that
when you're still in that borderline or
psychotic
space um loss isn't real in the same way
that it is when you can't blur the
boundary blur the line between self and
other or distort
reality uh to in order to
neutralize grief and and guilt and
things like that okay so um people in in
at the board line level of
organization it's not that it's not that
they can't you know experience loss
right
but when they do something to that that
hurts someone else there's a tendency to
kind of not see it or to cover it over
with you know magical thinking or or to
project you know some devalued part of
the self onto the other person and then
rationalize what you did after the fact
by well they deserved it because or
whatever it is right there's a way of
kind of where like the things that you
do aren't real in the same way that they
are at the neurotic level okay and um
and you know oftentimes you'll hear
things you know from people like you
loved ones of people with personality
disorders who who will say things like
you know one minute they're screaming at
me and then the next minute it's like
nothing happened and if I try to bring
up what happened if I try to like hold
them accountable for screaming at me
then they they rage at me for you know
trying to make them feel bad or whatever
it is right like in other words there's
just because the continuity of
experience inside the person with the
personality disorder is disrupted okay
by splitting and other things like
that um they're not
tracking what's happening
interpersonally in the same way that
somebody who's not doing that is
tracking Okay so
um when you get to the neurotic level of
of of
experiencing loss becomes real in a way
that it wasn't before um you can't sort
of take whatever it was that was ideal
about the person that you lost and just
transfer it over to somebody else who
you're idealizing now for instance you
can't undo the feeling of deficit inside
of yourself by flipping over to a
grandio side of the split okay and just
now suddenly don't have any deficits you
know so that's the kind of magical kind
of thinking that's happening at the
borderline level that now is no longer
possible at the neurotic level
unless there's so much stress or
emotional overwhelm that the person
regresses back to a kind of a a more
borderline level of of negotiating
experience and that happens okay so
people at the psychotic level can poke
up into the borderline level and then
back down people at the borderline level
can poke down into psychotic or up into
neurotic people at neurotic can poke
down into borderline and up into healthy
um so one way you can know if you're
kind of at that neurotic level is you
know what what is kind of dominating
your thoughts is it is it feelings of
guilt and concern about things you've
done that might have hurt somebody else
uh is it fear of the loss of people who
are important to you um or are you more
concerned with
self-preservation okay the the the
clinical terms for those two kinds of
anxiety are neurotic anxiety and
paranoid anxiety so paranoid anxiety is
about loss of self and that's the kind
of anxiety that dominates psychotic and
borderline experience okay when you get
up into the neurotic and healthy levels
it flips over because now the self-image
is fairly stable okay it so it flips to
loss of object loss of Love loss of the
people who are important to you fear
that you're are going to hurt them
somehow or betray them somehow or
disappoint them somehow and that's why
neurotic defenses are much more about
concealing um destructive impulses like
defenses like uh repression or
rationalization or intellectualization
or isolation of affect these are
neurotic defenses that protect the ego
so to speak from sort of the anxiety it
has about harming its
objects versus borderline level defenses
which are more about getting rid of of
EX of internal experience that the self
structure can't tolerate okay that
threatens to undo whatever stability
there is inside the
self so I hope that isn't too like you
know
um abstract you know uh I I hope that
helps I'm going to make my next video is
going to be about NPD at the borderline
level and then the one after that's
going to be about NPD at the neurotic
level so uh stay tuned for that it'll go
into much more detail about this stuff
and thanks for the
question all
right okay there is a question here
that's in an alphabet I cannot read um
and I so I apologize but I can't I can't
read the this question
um okay my halo
within asks how how do we know how many
npds there truly are considering they
don't typically go to a therapist online
seems to promote an unknown as fact that
they cannot be healed okay first of all
this nonsense about can't be healed you
know thumbs down okay uh that's just not
my experience it's just not it's it's
false
um there are some people who are
treatment resistant to the point where
they probably will never make
substantial progress okay and that's
true for any disease that is true for
any illness I don't care what it is
there are people who cannot get better
from where they are because of the
nature of their illness or the nature of
their you know psychology or the nature
of their physical Constitution whatever
it is okay whether we're talking about
mental or physical wellness um you know
and and that's just a fact all right but
there's nothing about NPD that like
intrinsically uh you just can't get
better that's I that idea either rests
on
outdated
um limitations in our uh Theory okay so
old
um old
psychoanalytic uh models they didn't
know how to treat anything below the
neurotic level right uh and so they were
they were flxs you know and especially
uh with NPD and that's because n people
with NPD tend not to form an
objectoriented transference all right so
that they're not transferring their
relationship with their dad onto you as
the therapist okay instead what they're
doing is they are transferring some
aspect of themselves onto you as the
therapist okay so it's a selfobject
transference okay not not an object
oriented transference and it took a
while for uh Theory to kind of wrap its
mind around that okay uh and in fact it
took until around the 1960s before
started to get a sense of oh what is
this actually and uh especially when uh
kernberg and cohut came on the scene uh
and and did their seminal Works uh in
the treatment of in conceptualization of
NPD that's when people started to be
like oh wait I think I starting to get a
sense of how we might be able to treat
this okay so that was that was 60 years
ago or so all right so you know this
idea that it's somehow not treatable is
at least that far out of date
um or it rests on some kind of
idea I think that's promoted has been
promoted online in the last 25 years or
so that
um there the authentic self in NPD is
dead and buried and cannot ever
be resurrected okay that it's that it is
just it is false through and through all
the way down like it's you know they
used to say it's Turtles all the way
down okay so in
this conceptualization
it's it's false all the way down um and
that's that's it's just not true it's
obviously not true at some level we're
going to run into the the the fact of
Pleasure and Pain for instance right
pain is noxious pleasure is uh desirable
okay so at some point we're going to run
into the organicity of the person and at
that point right you know uh you get
poked with a needle ouch all right well
oh look we have authentic experience
you know so like there there's always
authentic experience there and it can
always be built on um and and so I just
you this idea that you know NPD is
somehow the only mental disorder that
you know can't can't can't be healed it
it no uh nope okay so
anyway H sorry I got I I I got really uh
into into my fire about that I apologize
if I've gone off track
here uh how do we know how many people
with NPD there truly are okay um well we
don't right uh this has to do with
limitations in uh how it is
conceptualized in our diagnostic uh
manuals and it also has to do with
limitations in the research right so
prior to uh like 2009 or 2011 one of
those two so fairly recently
um all research on NPD almost used an
instrument called the NPI uh which is
the narcissistic personality inventory
and this what I talked about in my very
first video it it forms a feedback loop
okay so the uh the DSM says well n NPD
is this okay and then um and it's all
those grandiose things right and then
some researchers came along and they
said well let's make an instrument to
assess it and so they used those
checklists and they made an instrument
to assess those things AR grandiosity
overconfidence okay stuff like that um
and they even said right in in in the
article where they publish their
instrument they even say like this
instrument assesses these qualities okay
and it describes somebody who's really
confident who's gregarious who's you
know can can work a room uh stuff like
that um so they're not talking about
mental illness right that's not a
definition of mental illness that's just
somebody who's like kind of full of
themselves um but they they took it off
the DSM checklist okay and then for the
next 40 years or whatever 30 30
years 76% of all research into NPD used
that instrument okay so over three
quarters of all research looking at NPD
used this instrument that was derived
from the DSM checklist that only
encapsulated Ates half of of the
disorder all right and it's just it's
the compensated half so it cuts out the
the actual mental
illness that that is there as a basis as
a need for the
compensation uh so you know of course
they come up with all kinds of you know
figures right um and and there's a
notable difference if you look at the
research identifying NPD using
instruments like the
NPI versus going out and asking
clinicians to estimate what percentage
of their case load has NPD right because
even though there are a lot of
clinicians out there who don't know the
first thing about NPD there are also a
lot of clinicians who do and and have
enough of an awareness about what NPD is
to know that it's not always that
grandiose arrogant thing right in fact
often time often times it isn't and in
the literature going back at least 60
years there's a consistent
identification this is the clinical in
now there's a consistent identification
of two prototypical presentations of NPD
one is fragile the other one is
compensated one's vulnerable the other
one's
grandiose and it's it's contributed to
this myth that these are two you two
different kinds of narcissist it's not
really true all presentations of NPD
have both grandiose and vulnerable overt
and covert components overt just means
what you can see covert means what you
can't see vulnerable has to do with the
depressive experience uh and the
dependency uh side of the equation uh
grandiose has to do with the false self
uh compensations okay all people with
NPD have both of those some mixture it's
usually very complex um there might be
one that's more predominant than the
other uh but there there's always both
um okay
so I guess what I'm getting at here is
it really depends how we Define NPD and
how we assess uh NPD and you're going to
get different figures depending on those
factors um so you know I've seen like
you know NPI like that grandiose
DSM uh NPD seen figures less than 1% of
the
population you know of course that's
that's ridiculous that less than 1% of
the population has
NPD um but you know if all we're looking
for is that grandiose sort of
compensated
presentation then you know maybe that's
maybe that is true maybe 1% around of of
people are in that kind of hyper
compensated grandio State at any given
time I actually think it's probably
higher than that
um I think that every clinician out
there has somebody who's got a
significant level of pathological
narcissism in their case load and they
may not realize it they may misdiagnose
it as depression as bipolar 2 disorder
they may see it as dependency I'm sorry
dependent personality disorder they may
misdiagnose it as
BPD um they may uh think that it is
um uh like a some kind of a chronic
depressive
presentation um you know persistent
depressive disorder or something like
that used to be called um dysphoria I'm
sorry
um the word flew right on my head it'll
come to me in a few minutes but um
anyway it's currently impossible to
diagnose somebody in a vulnerable state
with NPD using the DSM you just can't do
it if you're going by the sort of
checklist criteria okay um and uh and
that's that's that's a real problem and
one of the reasons why you know there's
a big push to significantly revise uh
the D the next edition of the DSM with
respect to
NPD
okay where are
we all right
Ernest please tell the process of
restoring effective empathy during
therapy what results can be expected
okay is a great question uh and I need
to take a sip of
my soay uh to answer
it all right so the issue here has to do
with uh another persistent myth about
NPD and that is that the person is
somehow like incapable of
empathy that may be true for some people
who have NPD but I would argue that for
those people there's also a significant
component of psychopathy right so uh you
know where like people for whom there is
just kind of like a constitutional or
perhaps organic inability to
empathize just like straight NPD right
uh without some other complication
I do not uh think it's not been my
experience that there is no ability to
empathize um there is impaired ability
ability to empathize for some now
remember and this is something people
don't really know uh but in order to
diagnose NPD and I I realize now that
I'm borrowing from the very problematic
diagnostic Paradigm that I was just like
lambasting but um so the DSN M model
okay you have to have five of nine
criteria to qualify for NPD impaired
empathy is one of them all right so it's
totally possible to be diagnosed with
NPD using the DSM criteria without
impaired empathy okay so some that's
it's not necessary for an NPD
diagnosis that being said I think that
in most NPD presentations there is
impaired empathy and I would argue that
in most personality disorder
presentations there's some kind of
impaired empathy and the reason being
remember what I was saying about the
borderline which is different I should
have said this earlier the borderline
range of of functioning is different
than BPD okay BPD is named after the
borderline range of functioning all
right but they're different
things in the border the borderline
range is called that because it's on the
border between neurotic and psychotic
okay in the borderline range
remember the preoccupation is with
preservation of self right defending
against paranoid anxiety about loss of
self so that kind of egocentrism is
there in every personality disorder okay
it's not just NPD doesn't matter what
the personality disorder is there's
always going to be a kind of egocentrism
a kind of
preoccupation with am I okay
right uh and and that makes sense
developmentally you know we all go
through a phase where we we don't see
other people right not as other people
we see them as dependency figures right
you know caregivers this is my mom this
is my dad this is my aunt this is my
uncle right uh and we and we we we view
those relationships through the lens of
what they provide for us how they make
us feel right right we don't see that
there's an internal World in each of
those people and that they have their
own private life and private thoughts
and private feelings right we don't get
it when we're
young for p people with personality
disorders cognitive capabilities might
continue to develop right so they get on
a conceptual abstracted level that there
is an internal World in each of the
people around them but on an affective
level on the level of like like their
sort of basic you know patterns of
experiencing and and
perceiving they might not get that um
and they might still be operating from
that essentially
egocentric
Place uh and and again this is true for
any personality disorder not just
NPD NPD gets uh the reputation for being
like the impaired empathy you know
disorder because uh there tends to be
callous treatment of
others when devaluing all right
so because the person needs so
desperately to have and hold that
experience of inflated
self-esteem and because they need to
idealize people and idealize themselves
in order to maintain that whenever
somebody acts outside of the kind of
range of behavior that is in alignment
with that
idealization then there's a tendency to
devalue them all right and that
typically involves callous treatment of
the person critical treatment of the
person uh you know right like not not
being kind right okay when we're
devaluing somebody we kind of by
definition not being
kind and that tends to be such a
prominent
feature of NPD presentations that
impaired empathy has become a part of
the diagnostic criteria for
NPD but like I said you'll find impaired
empathy in any personality disorder
um and it's not because there's some
part of like the brain can't empathize
it's because there's preoccupation with
self and
self-preservation um so for somebody
with NPD when the St are low you
know there's empathy typically uh
somebody gets like you know like
collapses in the store and somebody with
NPD will typically go over and oh my
gosh are you okay and right and trying
to help
them uh you know try or trying to
comfort somebody who's who's upset right
or whatever you know it's not that they
they like human feelings are anma to
them somehow like they get it
right but when the stakes feel
higher uh when the heat is on so to
speak that's when the defenses start to
Rally uh and that's when the level of
empathy tends to go down okay because
the focus now is on
self-preservation
um
okay uh what am I trying to say here
that's that's part of it another part of
it has to do with
not being able to give what you haven't
got all right so it is widely believed
by myself included that NPD is partly
due to not having been empathized with
as a young child uh not having your
internal States right uh seen and
mirrored by other people around you to
help you understand and decode what's
going on inside
so when you haven't had that experience
it's then hard for you to give it to
anybody else and it's also hard to kind
of it's It's almost like the more of
that we get the more of it we have and
when we have enough of
it we can kind of put down some of those
concerns about self-preservation and we
have more to give to other people and so
this this kind of to answer your
question and I'm sorry I took the long
way to to the the answer um in the in
the context of a therapy relationship
with somebody who has
NPD so much of that therapy is just the
therapist trying to get empathically
what's going on inside the person right
trying to really get it right trying and
not not like not like in a oh I see
you're sad kind of way but like in a way
where you're like trying to like take it
in and feel it for yourself so that you
can then give it back to the person in a
way that allows them to feel
seen and you just do that over and over
and over again sometimes for a long time
however long it
takes for the person to have soaked up
enough that now they've they've got it
and now they can begin to give it all
right so um
that that's that's not and it's not just
what I have to say about it um uh Glenn
gabard and Holly crisp I think that's I
think it's Holly crisp uh wrote an
article about four years ago about just
a treatment of NPD um and uh and and
they they essentially had the same thing
to say um that you know there's often a
prolonged period in treatment of NPD
where you're just trying to mirror and
empathize um as well as other things too
right I mean you're you know you're like
hey you know like let's let's talk about
how we can cope better with blah blah
blah or let's talk about what actually
happened in your argument with your
spouse or right I mean I get it like
you're not just like sitting there being
like Oh I'm so sad for you but but that
is a part of it you know because the
person grew up without that and and
there and and they often times just feel
like they don't they can't see
themselves because nobody's ever seen
them and they've never had that
experience that relational experience of
being seen and taking that in and being
like oh oh that's what's going on or oh
that's how I feel right um and once they
they're able to get enough of that they
start to be able to offer it to other
people as well so thanks for the
question all right
most of us likely have anxiety and your
experience is validating okay thank you
uh yes uh I was being swallowed by
anxiety when I started this uh this live
stream um I'm not now but um yeah it
happens it absolutely happens and and I
just try
to just try to let it be you know let
the anxiety be and uh you know and and
it it tends to go away when when you do
that um or not or sometimes it doesn't
and you just you
know you you fall hard and um and life
goes on so but thank you for thank you
for letting me know
um all right let's
see all right I had before testing
thought I was NPD found out I was cptsd
and more how similar are the two outside
of empathy well there there are
different like ideas about cptsd so
people who like like if you go to like
the like cptsd
forums some of them will be adamant
like you know complex trauma is not the
same as personality disorder um and
maybe they're right I you know I think
the the concept of complex trauma is
still evolving all right so it's not for
instance in the DSM yet although it
likely will be in the next
Edition I think collectively we are
coming to understand mental
illness increasingly from a
trauma-informed
perspective uh increasingly we
are like realizing that there's kind of
a normative trajectory of development
all right you know all things being kind
of like all the parts being being where
they're supposed to be or whatever like
there tends to be a normative uh course
of human development um and and when
adverse experiences happen during
especially those first four or five
years of development it can really have
a substantial impact on um on the you
know the personality right um and uh and
and so you know that's that's trauma
okay and and interestingly you know if
you go all the way back to like the
beginning of
psychology um you know and Freud and
Brer Joseph Brer Brer uh they were
collaborating at the end of the 19th
century and the beginning of the 20th
century uh on and really coming up with
some like groundbreaking
ideas
breer's uh model was trauma based and
had it not been for Freud I think uh
psychology would have started as a
trauma
informed science of the mind and it
would have stayed that way um but but we
had Freud and he took it in a different
direction for a while and now we're kind
of coming back around um and so I see
personality disorder as trauma based uh
and and I see it as complex trauma now
I'm not saying it's cptsd right I'm
saying it is a a condensation
of many
traumas that occurred uh mostly in in a
relational
context uh and that impaired or
inhibited the development of ego
functions and capacities that we rely on
as adults to navigate the world in a way
that isn't disruptive and disordered and
maladaptive all right
um and uh
so I don't I you know I I don't see a
big difference between like NPD or BPD
or you know ocpd whatever it is any
personality disorder and complex trauma
I think they're I think we're talking
about kind of the same thing uh like I
said people in cptsd forums might
vehemently disagree with that um and I
think the way that cptsd is defined in
like the uh the ICD for instance um it
it it requires you know a certain kind
of trauma uh to to qualify and I might
not be talking about that kind of trauma
the kind of trauma I'm talking about is
relational trauma trauma that occurs in
the context of those early care
relationships uh and um because that's
how we build a self right that our self
is is built relationally you know that
the the person you are your personality
it's all of it your whole psychology is
relational whether it involves a
relationship with self or a relationship
with other it's all relationship and and
the things that happen in those very
early relationships they get in on the
ground floor and they can they can have
tremendous impact on the the kinds of
relationships a person ends up having in
adulthood both with other people and
with themselves it kind of goes back to
that first question that was asked uh so
so thank
you oh also uh real quick you you you
specifically talk about empathy here
again I think anytime somebody is
dealing with being triggered okay if
you're if you've got PTSD of some kind
complex or otherwise and you're getting
triggered uh in situations your empathy
goes right out the window right um
because you're preoccupied now with
survival right and and that is exactly
what I was talking about with other
personality disorders right why there's
impaired empathy and personality
disorders or at the borderline level of
functioning it's because the person is
constantly getting triggered right and
and now they're preoccupied with
survival right paranoid anxiety holding
the self together having a functional
self-image right not falling apart not
losing the self and and and going into
like these awful unimaginable states of
being uh that our whole personality
really is built to defend against um and
uh so yeah there's no empathy when
somebody's triggered uh you know that's
it's it's in incompatible right um to be
to be empathic means you have enough
you're stable enough that you're like
here I am and there you are right but
when you know you're triggered in trauma
no you're not you're not functioning on
that level there's no empathy um until
empathy is
restored uh and um you know you calm
down right or
whatever so um thank
you all right I'm I'm running out of
time everybody goodness gracious boy
this blew right by um I you know I I it
is my it is my aspirational goal to do
one of these every month and uh some
months I'm able to do that and some
months I'm not uh and um I'm glad I was
able to do it today uh and I hope to be
able to do it again next month because I
just love doing these like once I get
over my like you know anxiety about
whatever um I I love it and I I love
that you're here and I love your
questions um and uh it just feels like a
special thing you know um I think so
rarely are um discussions like
this had about NPD where it's not about
like throwing someone in the garbage can
but rather it's about like hey how can
we how can we understand you know um
what what happens and why uh so I I just
so much appreciate everybody being
here
um why do I have facial fat when I'm
skinny I I just don't know um I hope you
hope you get that get that sorted out
thanks for the question
um your live chats get recorded and I
know people watch them at their own
convenience yes yeah and thank you and I
realized I'm only seven minutes into the
you know this this question or comment
was posted at 207 so um thank you for
the thank you for taking care of me
there uh I appreciate
it all right
let's
see this is a good one why narcissism is
it close to home with yourself or family
you know um why why does any clinician
specialize in whatever they specialize
in right I mean
um a boundary that I keep intentionally
in my in my work uh at least my work on
YouTube and podcasts and stuff like that
is that I don't I I don't base any of
what I say you know like I don't appeal
to like like a personal trauma history
or or my own you mental health
diagnosis if I have one or you right
like this isn't like my time to like air
my you know personal issues or prosecute
my personal grudges right um I just I
just don't feel like that belongs here
and I feel like it would all it would do
is obfuscate and muddy the the water
right because then it would be like is
Dr enson saying that because you know
his like Grandpa was a narcissist or
whatever you know or is it because it's
in the literature right um or it's his
clinical experience I feel like if if my
role is as an author is as an authority
okay um and a source of information for
people I want that role to be to not be
um uh what's I'm looking for here
um you know like uh confused I guess
with
um uh you know like my like my own
personal mental health or or whatever
you know and I understand that that's
not common I understand that there's
actually like a number of YouTube like
psychologists or therapists or whatever
that you know their whole thing is like
I'm a trauma Survivor and here's what
what I have to say about it and and
great great for them and great for that
um but that's not what I'm trying to do
here uh and so um I just I feel like
it's it's just not good professional
boundaries and I feel like it muddies
the water and I feel like it um
might in some way impair my ability to
treat patients right so remember um this
isn't like my full-time gig right like
being a YouTube YouTube person um I I
have a full clinical practice uh that I
do every day and I see patients every
day and I treat groups and I consult and
I assess uh and and in the context of
those treatment settings there needs to
be some uh well abound right I need to
hold a clinical frame to varying degrees
depending on the patient some patients
are you know doing well enough that I I
can let a little bit more of myself
enter the room but some patients they
need for me to not to not like really
like they need for me to hold that
boundary okay to protect them and their
ability to have a safe space there there
are people in the world who have been so
intruded upon emotionally or personally
that if I were to like be a personality
you know um and then try to treat
patients who who might have some of
those issues um it would it would uh
kill the treatment before it even
started and so I I try to prioritize
that as well it's also one of the
reasons why I won't do case studies and
I won't specifically site you know like
oh well there was this one patient who X
Y and Z and if I do say something like
that I ensure that it's it is so like
washed of any personal details or
identifying data that I could literally
be talking about anyone
um it's because my first priority is to
the Integrity of my clinical work um and
so um I just won't I just won't disclose
my like yeah my you know psychiatric
history or my whatever right it's not a
part of except to say when when I'm
anxious that I'm anxious because it's I
think probably pretty obvious um when I
when I'm
anxious uh and that's yeah that's you
know that's a part of uh my psychology
that I get I get anxious in front of a
crowd so um okay thanks for the
question um oh one thing I will say
about it also T Wells is that
um all of us
have like narcissism right and I don't
mean all of us have pathological
narcissism but narcissism is just a term
for the relationship you have with
yourself okay so to to a varying uh
degree you have a healthy relationship
with yourself or you have a pathological
relationship with yourself um and
so and I see the way that that
relationship with self is built as as
being you know like
so in So like
um integrally like uh wrapped up in in
that early care
setting um that
um I just I when I when I talk about
narcissism um I really I feel like I'm
I'm you know talking about like
um you know
I don't know what I'm trying to say
I guess what I'm trying to say is
um I I just I feel strongly about you
know caring for and and and
and and loving and and
honoring
um anyone you know people but especially
little kids and and and little children
and I see this way that I see NPD as as
you know
rooted in like just like
tragedy at at that at that age you know
like like little kids like who just want
to be loved and want to feel accepted
and and they're and they're learning who
about who they are right and what
they're getting back uh is is is stuff
that they can't use and and it and it
turns into a life time of paying um and
and when I see that and when I think
about that uh just it like you know like
it I I'm I feel moved um on an emotional
level when I think about that and
um and and I think that's why I'm good
at this work um because I think
narcissists can be so hard to love
because of what they're putting out
which is this facade of self-sufficiency
and you know or arrogance or or whatever
it is right it's it can be hard to get
close and I feel like um because I don't
I I have a tendency to see everyone uh
to to a greater or lesser extent as
little kids and see them in the context
of those early formative
experiences um I just I just go right to
it typically and and I think it feels
like being found to people and and that
that's meaningful to me um just as sure
as if I was
coming up you know to try to help a
kiddo who who who was lost in a store or
something you know um so I don't know if
that helps but that's that's my answer
just got a couple minutes left here
um and uh I'm sorry I didn't get to uh
to the rest of these questions I there's
some good ones here um thank you all
again for joining I guess I want to
spend just a minute to talk about uh you
know my practice and the services I
offer and stuff like that um so you know
like I said I've got a full-time
practice uh and I do offer uh individual
therapy although my practice my
individual practice is full and I have a
weight list right now one thing I want
to put out there though is that I'm
looking at expanding my practice um and
uh you know I've got I've got a a
significant weight list and um and I
want to offer treatment to more people
and so I'm looking at hiring um a uh you
know somebody to to work with me
basically a the a licensed or
pre-licensed uh therapist to work with
me uh so if anybody out there is you
know fits that bill and there're might
be interested um send shoot me an email
um my email you can contact me on my
website which is heal nd.org um and let
me know uh because I'm I'm I'm in I'm
actively searching uh for um somebody
who can join my practice and who who you
know can can think about these issues
and work with these uh problems um from
a a similar perspective um and you know
of course I would I would be there as
well um to consult with and and Andor
train that person so reach out if that's
something that's interesting to you um I
also offer group therapy and I currently
right now don't have a weit list for
group therapy
um I uh I have two groups running right
now uh but I'm I'm open to uh to
starting a third if there's interest uh
those typically run for about an hour
and 15 minutes once a week they're
capped at six people per group um and
they're ongoing open uh process groups
so you know it's it's a it's a support
group really um I'm there for every
group meeting and uh and um you know I
think one of the things that's really
beautiful about group work with NPD is
that it so much that you know like of th
so many of those like secret shames that
that people tend to have inside of
themselves they they can get normalized
um and the shame can go down uh and I
and I think uh people can find belonging
in acceptance that way and and it just
it lessens the you know takes the teeth
out of some some of those uh aspects of
the disorder um so if you're interested
in that send me an email as well and
finally I do um I do personality
assessments and I I have just a very
small weight list for those those are
not like I give you an mmpi or something
and then tell you the results those are
comprehensive personality assessments um
I meet with people uh sometimes anywhere
between like six sometimes as many as
nine or 10 times and we do a structured
clinical interview
I give you a bunch of Assessments to uh
complete uh and um and I really strive
to you know bring the Same Spirit uh you
know that that I have on my channel and
in my clinical work uh in my therapy
work to the to these assessments so it's
not just about like do you have NPD or
not it's like um you know is it NPD or
is it BPD or is it something else or you
know to what extent uh does depression
play a role or biip bipolar uh disorder
or PTSD or dissociative experience like
I put together a comprehensive uh
personality profile uh and it's
typically you know around a 15-page
report um that also incorporates in a
meaningful way your your history as well
so it's it's it's putting together the
history with the kind of with the
science um to to give you feedback that
you can use um moving forward so uh if
you're interested in that let me know as
well um and I do consultations with
loved ones so um yeah okay uh and those
are time limited so I meet with you
between one to three sessions for those
okay that's enough of a plug about my
practice but I do feel like there's like
resources are so limited for people out
there with these issues um I I just I
try to you know offer as many uh
different kinds of service as I can uh
and um anyway okay so again thanks for
joining me today and thanks for your
questions and I look forward to uh
seeing uh you all again next time
hopefully next month and uh stay tuned
uh sometime in the next month or so for
that video about um borderline uh NPD
all right thanks again take care